Dementia has become one of the leading causes of deaths worldwide and at some point, was identified as the leading cause of death in the UK. As life expectancy continues to increase, it has been observed that cognitive functions gradually decline, characterized by the existence of comorbidities including depression, hypertension, diabetes, amongst others. Early detection of dementia risk level has been identified as crucial in the implementation of strategies to delay or reverse cognitive decline. The rising socio-economic costs of dementia treatment have also necessitated further research into detecting dementia at the earliest stage across all populations, irrespective of socio-economic class. This study looked in-depth into early prediction of dementia risk levels using a dataset collected by a reputable dementia research institute. Identification of relevant dementia risk factors to be included in the experimental dataset was achieved through domain experts’ knowledge. After the dataset was curated, exploration into relationships between dementia risk levels and attributes of the dataset were examined using different statistical measures and tests. Furthermore, Machine Learning techniques including Random Forest (RF), Decision Tree, XGBoost and neural networks models such as Artificial Neural Network (ANN) were constructed to accurately predict dementia risk outcomes. The initial results obtained indicated DT, RF and XGBoost each identified as the best 3 classifiers for predicting dementia risk levels. To improve the performance of the machine learning models, an Ensemble machine learning model was constructed with DT, RF, XGBoost and ANN using stacking technique to harness the collective strengths of each identified Model while applying dimensionality reduction on the dataset. After the Recursive Feature Elimination (RCFE) technique gave us optimal number of significant features, the Ensemble was fitted into the resulting dataset and validated using the hold out test data. The results obtained indicated the Ensemble Machine Learning improved the performance of the models.
